---
id: life-with-no-future
title: Life with "No Future"
description: A brief analysis on Gregg Araki's "The Living End", emphasizing the queer theoretical work of Lee Edelman, Jack Halberstam, and others. Written for my queer & trans media analysis course at Concordia University.
date: 2026-03-08
image: '@assets/blog/life-with-no-future/living-end.png'
---

Gregg Araki’s 1992 film “The Living End”, released near the climax of the AIDS pandemic, depicts the story of two queer, HIV positive men’s incendiary, affective break– spurred by the heterosexist power relations dominating them– as they rove around the United States, trying to seize something out of what little time they have left (Malatino 108). By December 1991, 133,232 people were reported to die of AIDS in the United States, a reality made possible through institutional violence in the form of the Reagan and Bush government’s purposeful inaction (Anonymous Queers 6; Archives of Dermatology). At the same time, hate crimes against queers were at record highs, from stabbings to harassment outside of gay bars (Anonymous Queers 10). Araki’s film formalizes the constructed nature of the violent and heterosexist mass culture, and how queer identity and time might emerge in response to this culture, whilst ultimately being constrained by the intolerable conditions of this reality.

Many of the early moments of this film see our principal characters shot in low-key lighting, with claustrophobic framing, often taking place in a car or indoors. Cutaways to news footage of gruesome surgeries and murders committed by “ultraconservative whites” as we familiarize ourselves with Luke and Jon emphasize the presence of this violence in their world. The early parts of the film see Luke subjected to an onslaught of violence, again mirroring the real-world violence the gay community experienced, such as the murder of James Zapparti, the beating of two gay men on Labour Day at Tompkins Square Park, and many more (Anonymous Queers 10). There is a camp sensibility and double sense to the film’s violence, which acts both as this strange absurdity and also as a meaningful representation of the violent world of normalcy (Sontag 5).  One such instance is early in the film, when a wife stabs her husband, proclaiming his homosexual activities (with Luke) have become ‘unfashionable’ to her. No longer can she stand a husband who does not worship the heteronormative time/space constructs of reproductive and family time (Halberstam 26). His blood-splattered arm hangs over the bed as we see her pristine pink shoes in deep focus in the background. The world presented in these early scenes has an artificial quality to it, formalizing the distance from queers and “normal” society. Indeed, Araki pushes to reveal “normalcy” as imposed and itself very strange. Immediately after witnessing mariticide, we return from a cut to black as a conservative couple recites the constitution with Biblical reverence below a billboard for cowboy boots. Shot in low-key light, they’re lit primarily by the hard, directional light of the billboard behind them, as if illuminated by their holy reverence to the normal. The absurd, comic contrast of these two scenes, and their camp sensibilities make visible the performative– and often violently enforced– nature of the ‘status quo’ and ‘normal’ (Sontag 4). To that end, signage is a recurring motif in this film, making visible the constant bombardment “by images of statistical populations and their norms”, pushing us to “to blend, to have no visible difference and no conflict” with heteronormative society, even whilst gay men were dying en masse, and signs and grafitti throughout the country shamelessly proclaim “KILL FAGS” (Warner 54, 60). 

How the film presents and introduces its central characters greatly informs its discussion of the countercultural queer temporalities and rage that erupt from this oppressive, marginalizing society. Our first introduction to Luke sets him outside, with warm lighting and loud, diegetic music, as he tags “FUCK THE WORLD”. There’s a palpable energy, anger, and dynamism as these elements synthesize with the editing to highlight Luke’s shameless stigmaphilia and queer rage (Warner 43; Malatino 108). By contrast, we see an exasperated John in closer framing, constrained within the confines of his car, as he provides voiceover narration about the seeming ‘normalcy’ of his life post-diagnosis. Yet, as Jon drives away we see the seeds of resistance are present even within him: a bumper sticker says “Choose Death”. Already, the time compression from his disease, his constantly diminishing future challenges his complacency and passivity, emphasizing the urgency to live for the here and now (Halberstam 13). It’s this very headspace that pushes him to Luke. Following their meeting, the bulk of the film sees Luke and John on a road trip outside of the dimly lit, closely framed, indoor confines of heteronormativity of the early film. At first, their queerness continues to be exhibited when at least some of these formal elements are present, with the camera often framing them in separate shots. As the film progresses, they are increasingly framed together and shown in exterior settings. They are more frequently framed in wider shots, and their sex scenes grow increasingly explicit (from a fade-out in the early scenes to the extended shower sequence). These changes formalize their growing together, as Luke pulls John, the “stigmaphobe”– ever determined to stay in continuity with normative society– into his lifestyle of shameless “stigmaphilia” (Warner 43). Luke is proud, bashes back, and does whatever he can to tear Jon out of his customary state of acceptance (Anonymous Queers 6, 15). He revels in his anti-social qualities, rejecting the Ponzi scheme of reproductive futurism; literally infecting himself with AIDS (Edelman 4). The gun that Luke steals early on in the film is a central motif related to this. The gun gives Luke power to fight back, to reflect the violence and intolerance we have seen him experience. Indeed, Luke is almost a personification of queer temporality, a ‘moment’ that comes to Jon’s life, but also a force– one that opposes every form of social viability. (Halberstam 27; Edelman 9). Through the force of his queer rage, Luke demonstrates to Jon “that another way of being is possible” (Malatino 124). As Jon is pulled into the mindset of the “death drive”, into queer temporality and space, we see this formalized as Darcy checks in on his apartment. His fish, Craig, tied to his past life as a “stigmaphobe”, the kind of gay “you could take home to Mom”. that doesn’t “gross out” heterosexists, is out of the bowl; his queerness can no longer be constrained (Warner 42). 

Unfortunately, for some queer subjects, time and space are limited by risks they are willing to take (Halberstam 26). Jon is unable to continue inhabiting this queer temporality, unable to sustain this state of stigmaphilia and rage. Luke’s anger and militancy challenges respectability– for him, the indiscretion, the gun, the rage provides protection and makes his struggle legible (Malatino 113-14).  There’s a certain suicidality in Luke’s crusade; encompassed by the temporality of his life, Luke seeks to become that death drive, to go with a “bang” and a “big fucking smile on [his] face”, when “the point”, as Edelman puts it, should be to “[recognize] and [refuse] the consequences of grounding reality in denial of the drive” (Edelman 17). Jon, on the other hand, wants to engage in “respectability politics”, pleading with Luke to “at least be a little discreet with it”, viewing Luke’s rage– through a normative lens– as malformed, dysfunctional, and wrong, bringing them into frequent conflict (Warner 44; Malatino 115). Just as Darcy slaps the fish, trying to bring it back to life, to bring Jon back into her world of heteronormativity– while it enabled his break, and provided him the freedom he’s enjoyed thus far, Jon is no longer able to sustain the shamelessness nor the rage (Malatino 122). Without political unity from his assimilationist other, uncoupled from any period of recovery, and lacking an infrapolitical ethics of care, Luke’s queer rebellion then collapses in on itself, as our pair’s “hackneyed romantic fantasy” comes to an end (Malatino 122). Luke and Jon’s romance degrades, and the hatred and violence queers find themselves subjected to is re-directed horizontally at each other. We return to increasingly closer framing, as Luke turns on Jon, until love is twisted into rape in extremely claustrophobic detail.  The gun, the symbol of Jon’s power– power he has seized from the heteronormative– fails him as he tries to go out on his own terms, to escape the victimhood society has been trying to saddle him with. Without the instrument of his rage, Luke finds himself as powerless as Jon.

To conclude, Araki’s film shows us how the reality of violent, heteronormative society and culture prevents queers from collectivizing to realise their full radical potential, in spite of the countercultural efforts and righteous rage inhabited by parts of the community. An apathetic Doctor, telling Jon AIDS is “hardly a death sentence” spurs on the beginnings of a rage. This rage is personified by Luke, and together they break, roving across the United States, making legible their anger and love, living “day by day” without care for the reproductive future they never truly could have any part of (Malatino 108; Edelman 4). Yet this state is unsustainable; Luke, who sees nothing beyond the veil of his militancy, and Jon, who wishes to return to a ‘normal’ life, are torn apart. In our final moments, Jon and Luke still find themselves in the outdoors, “free” in an open location with bright, high-key lighting, but the mood is not one of freedom. Diegetic sounds of the waves and gulls carry us into credits. Ever constrained by their stalled imaginations under the intolerable conditions of their time, the “future” for our protagonists– and, at the time, perhaps the queer movement– seems not so bright.

### Works Cited

Edelman, Lee. ‘The Future Is Kids Stuff’. _No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive_, Duke University Press, 2004, pp. 1–22.
Anonymous Queers. ‘Queers Read This!’ _GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies_,  Fawaz, Ramzi, and Shanté Paradigm Smalls, vol. 24, nos 2–3, June 2018, pp. 169–87. _DOI.org (Crossref)_, https://doi.org/10.1215/10642684-4324765.
Halberstam, Jack. ‘Queer Temporality and Postmodern Geographies’. _In a Queer Time and Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural Lives_, New York University Press, 2005, pp. 12–34. Sexual Cultures.
Malatino, Hilary. ‘Tough Breaks: Trans Rage and the Cultivation of Resilience’. _Hypatia_, vol. 34, no. 1, 2019, pp. 121–40. _DOI.org (Crossref)_, https://doi.org/10.1111/hypa.12446.
Sontag, Susan. ‘Notes on “Camp”’. _Partisan Review_, vol. 31, no. 4, 1964, pp. 515–30.
‘The Second 100,000 Cases of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome—United States, June 1981-December 1991’. _Archives of Dermatology_, vol. 128, no. 3, Mar. 1992, p. 316. _DOI.org (Crossref)_, https://doi.org/10.1001/archderm.1992.01680130026002.
Warner, Michael. ‘What’s Wrong With Normal?’ _The Trouble with Normal: Sex, Politics, and the Ethics of Queer Life_, 1. Harvard University Press paperback ed, Harvard Univ. Press, 2000, pp. 41–61.
